Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.
This were to be new made when thou art old,
And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.
But if thou live, remember'd not to be,
Die single and thine image dies with thee.
Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
Which, used, lives th' executor to be.
But flowers distill'd, though they with winter meet,
Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.
Be not self-will'd, for thou art much too fair
To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.
So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon:
Unlook'd, on diest unless thou get a son.
Whose speechless song being many, seeming one,
Sings this to thee: 'Thou single wilt prove none.'
No love toward others in that bosom sits
That on himself such murd'rous shame commits.
Make thee another self for love of me,
That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
She carv'd thee for her seal, and meant thereby,
Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.
And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence
Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.
O! none but unthrifts. Dear my love, you know,
You had a father: let your son say so.
Or else of thee this I prognosticate:
'Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.'
And all in war with Time for love of you,
As he takes from you, I engraft you new.
To give away yourself, keeps yourself still,
And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.
But were some child of yours alive that time,
You should live twice,--in it, and in my rhyme.
So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.
Yet, do thy worst old Time: despite thy wrong,
My love shall in my verse ever live young.
But since she prick'd thee out for women's pleasure,
Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.
Let them say more that like of hearsay well;
I will not praise that purpose not to sell.
Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain,
Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again.
O! learn to read what silent love hath writ:
To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.
Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art,
They draw but what they see, know not the heart.
Then happy I, that love and am belov'd,
Where I may not remove nor be remov'd.
Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee;
Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.
Lo! thus, by day my limbs, by night my mind,
For thee, and for myself, no quiet find.
But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
And night doth nightly make grief's length seem stronger.
For thy sweet love remember'd such wealth brings
That then I scorn to change my state with kings.
But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
All losses are restor'd and sorrows end.
Their images I lov'd, I view in thee,
And thou--all they--hast all the all of me.
But since he died and poets better prove,
Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love'.
Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;
Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth.
Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.
That I an accessary needs must be,
To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.
But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
Look what is best, that best I wish in thee:
This wish I have; then ten times happy me!
If my slight muse do please these curious days,
The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.
And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
By praising him here who doth hence remain.
Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes.
Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
Thine by thy beauty being false to me.
But here's the joy; my friend and I are one;
Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone.
All days are nights to see till I see thee,
And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.
Receiving nought by elements so slow
But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.
This told, I joy; but then no longer glad,
I send them back again, and straight grow sad.
As thus; mine eye's due is thy outward part,
And my heart's right, thy inward love of heart.
Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
Awakes my heart, to heart's and eye's delight.
And even thence thou wilt be stol'n I fear,
For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.
To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws,
Since why to love I can allege no cause.
For that same groan doth put this in my mind,
My grief lies onward, and my joy behind.
'Since from thee going, he went wilful-slow,
Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.'
Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope,
Being had, to triumph; being lacked, to hope.
In all external grace you have some part,
But you like none, none you, for constant heart.
And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
When that shall vade, by verse distills your truth.
So, till the judgment that yourself arise,
You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes.
Or call it winter, which being full of care,
Makes summer's welcome, thrice more wished, more rare.
So true a fool is love, that in your will,
Though you do anything, he thinks no ill.
I am to wait, though waiting so be hell,
Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well.
O! sure I am the wits of former days,
To subjects worse have given admiring praise.
And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand.
Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.
For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
From me far off, with others all too near.
'Tis thee,--myself,--that for myself I praise,
Painting my age with beauty of thy days.
His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
And they shall live, and he in them still green.
This thought is as a death which cannot choose
But weep to have, that which it fears to lose.
O! none, unless this miracle have might,
That in black ink my love may still shine bright.
Tir'd with all these, from these would I be gone,
Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.
O! him she stores, to show what wealth she had
In days long since, before these last so bad.
And him as for a map doth Nature store,
To show false Art what beauty was of yore.
But why thy odour matcheth not thy show,
The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.
If some suspect of ill mask'd not thy show,
Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.
Lest the wise world should look into your moan,
And mock you with me after I am gone.
For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
And so should you, to love things nothing worth.
This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
To love that well, which thou must leave ere long.
The worth of that is that which it contains,
And that is this, and this with thee remains.
Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
Or gluttoning on all, or all away.
For as the sun is daily new and old,
So is my love still telling what is told.
These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.
But thou art all my art, and dost advance
As high as learning, my rude ignorance.
Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
Since what he owes thee, thou thyself dost pay.
Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
The worst was this,--my love was my decay.
You still shall live,--such virtue hath my pen,--
Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.
And their gross painting might be better us'd
Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abus'd.
There lives more life in one of your fair eyes
Than both your poets can in praise devise.
You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.
Then others, for the breath of words respect,
Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.
But when your countenance fill'd up his line,
Then lacked I matter; that enfeebled mine.
Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,
In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.
Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
That for thy right, myself will bear all wrong.
For thee, against my self I'll vow debate,
For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.
And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
Compar'd with loss of thee, will not seem so.
Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take
All this away, and me most wretchcd make.
But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.
How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,
If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show!
For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds;
Lilies that fester, smell far worse than weeds.
Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege;
The hardest knife ill-us'd doth lose his edge.
But do not so; I love thee in such sort,
As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
Or, if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer,
That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.
Yet seem'd it winter still, and you away,
As with your shadow I with these did play.
A vengeful canker eat him up to death.
More flowers I noted, yet I none could see,
And make time's spoils despised every where.
Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life,
